\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename screamer.info
@settitle Screamer
@c %**end of header

@c Replace:
@c   ProjectName
@c   ProjectDescription

@c for install-info
@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* ProjectName:           ProjectDescription
@end direntry

@titlepage

@title ProjectName
@subtitle ProjectDescription

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@include include/sb-texinfo.texinfo

@node Top
@top Introduction

@c Short description of what's what.

@c Creator and maintainer information.

@c Mailing lists
The mailing list
@example
@url{http://...}
@end example
exists for ProjectName-related discussions.

@c Version control
ProjectName is maintained in Git:
@example
git clone git://github.com/...
@end example
will get you a local copy.
@example
@url{http://github.com/nikodemus/screamer}
@end example
is the GitHub project page.

@contents

@menu
* Overview::                    
* Examples::                    
* Dictionary::                  
* Concept Index::               
* Function Index::              
* Variable Index::              
* Type Index::                  
* Colophon::                    
@end menu

@node Overview
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Overview

@c Just how does this thing work?

@node Examples
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Examples

@c Surely you have some?

@node Dictionary
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Dictionary

@c All the exported symbols...
@c
@c @include include/macro-package-macroname.texinfo
@c @include include/fun-package-funname.texinfo
@c
@c etc.

@include include/backmatter.texinfo

@bye
