The Coq module provides software object representations for both individual Coq
files (`coq' object) and larger Coq projects (`coq-project' object).

@heading Coq Module Organization

The `coq' module is split into two layers. The lower layer, implemented in   
`serapi-io.lisp', is strictly responsible for serialization of Coq abstract
syntax trees (ASTs). This is done with Coq SerAPI
@url{https://github.com/ejgallego/coq-serapi}, specifically `sertop', which
allows for querying of Coq documents and serializes ASTs to S-expressions.

The `coq' and `coq-project' software objects, implemented in `coq.lisp' are
higher-level abstractions built on `serapi-io'. Ideally, clients should only
have to construct software objects and using API functions provided by
`coq.lisp' without having to worry about the lower-level.

@heading Setting up SerAPI
In order to construct a Coq software object, coq-serapi must be installed.
Refer to its project page for instructions. Once that is done, the variables
`*sertop-path*' and `*sertop-args*' should be set. This can be done either with
`setf' or by setting the environment variables `SERAPI' and `COQ_PRELUDE' and
invoking `set-serapi-paths' to update the Lisp variables. `SERAPI' and
`*sertop-path*' should point to the sertop executable.

If you intend to use the Coq standard library, you will need to ensure that
sertop is started with the `--prelude' flag pointing to the coq/lib directory.
This can be done either by setting the environment variable `COQ_PRELUDE' to
that path or by setting `*sertop-args*' to
@code{(list ``--prelude=/path/to/coq/lib/'')}.

@heading Creating Coq objects
Coq software objects have the following fields:
@itemize
@item project-file - path to _CoqProject file
@item file-source - path to the Coq source file this object represents
@item imports - list of ASTs representing load or require statements
@item genome - list of ASTs representing the Coq source, excluding imports
@item ast-ids - list of AST IDs assigned to ASTs in the genome
@item fitness - fitness of the object last time it was evaluated
@end itemize

The recommended way to create a Coq software object is using `from-file':

@code{
(from-file (make-instance 'coq :project-file "/path/to/_CoqProject")
           "/path/to/Foo.v")
}

If you don't have a _CoqProject file, you may omit the `:project-file' keyword.

Since many API functions require interactions with SerAPI, a `with-serapi' macro
is provided to automatically create a sertop process. Due to the interactive
nature of sertop, it's often necessary to use the same sertop process across
multiple API calls. Many API functions have a `serapi' parameter which allows
you to pass in a sertop process but will create a new one if none is provided.

The `from-file' method for Coq software objects allows you to specify a SerAPI
process by setting the second parameter to a list containing the path to the
source file and a serapi process. Using `with-serapi', you could load ``Foo.v''
like this:

@code{
(with-serapi (serapi)
  (from-file (make-instance 'coq :project-file "/path/to/_CoqProject")
             (list "/path/to/Foo.v" serapi)))
}


Each `-I' or `-R' line in _CoqProject will be automatically added to the Coq
loadpath in the serapi process. If a new serapi process is created, you must
ensure that these load paths are reset and any imports are reloaded. You can do
this with either `set-load-paths' (which only sets the load paths) or
`reset-and-load-imports' (which in addition to setting load paths also executes
import statements).

@heading Usage of Coq objects
The ASTs of a Coq genome are lists whose elements are lists, symbols, and
strings. A `type-safe-swap' mutation selects two subtrees that have the same
``tag'' (i.e., the first symbol in that list) and swaps them. Favoring this
mutation helps to cut down on type errors that would result from swapping
arbitrary subtrees.

In the AST representations provided by SerAPI, many statements include location
information tying AST nodes to locations in the source file. To help reduce the
size of the AST, `from-file' replaces the full location information with the
list `(:loc nil)'. This ensures that it's clear where the location information
was without overly cluttering the AST. The implementation of
`lookup-source-strings' ensures that these are removed prior to sending the ASTs
to sertop to look up source strings. The default implementations of `pick-bad'
and `pick-good' for Coq objects exclude ``located'' statements.

Since sertop maintains a stateful representation of definitions that have been
loaded and Coq prevents redefinition, it is sometimes necessary to reset the
state of sertop to an earlier state. The easiest way to do this is to use
`insert-reset-point' to indicate that you may later want to restore sertop to
the current state, and `reset-serapi-process' to reset to a previously saved
state. Both `from-file' and `reset-and-load-imports' insert a reset point before
returning.
