\input texinfo
@c @setfilename emacs-web-server.info
@documentencoding utf-8
@settitle Software Evolution Library

@copying
This file documents the Software Evolution library

Copyright (C) 2014 Eric Schulte <eschulte@@cs.unm.edu>

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with the Invariant Section being ``GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE,''
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Libraries
@direntry
* Software Evolution: (software-evolution). library enabling extant software evolution
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Software Evolution Library
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Software Evolution Library

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What's it for?
* Implementation::              How's it implemented?
* Usage::                       How's it used?

Appendices

* Copying::                     The GNU General Public License gives
                                you permission to redistribute GNU Emacs on
                                certain terms; it also explains that there is
                                no warranty.
* GNU Free Documentation License::  The license for this documentation.
* Index::                       Complete index.




@end menu

@node Introduction, Implementation, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction

The Software Evolution library enables the programmatic modification
and evaluation of extant software.

A common interface abstracts over multiple types of software objects
(@pxref{Software Objects}) including abstract syntax trees parsed from
source code, LLVM IR, compiled assembler, and linked ELF binaries.
Mutation and evaluation methods (@pxref{Software Methods}) are
implemented on top of this interface supporting Search Based Software
Engineering (SBSE) techniques (@pxref{Search Functions}).

This library has been used to optimize benchmark programs to use less
energy (see @cite{Post-compiler Software Optimization for Reducing
Energy}) and to repair security vulnerabilities in closed source
binaries (see @url{http://eschulte.github.io/netgear-repair/}).

@node Implementation, Software Objects, Introduction, Top
@chapter Implementation
@cindex implementation

The Software Evolution library is implemented in Common Lisp and is
intended for use in Common Lisp programs.  @ref{fig:overview} provides
an overview of the Software Evolution system, the specifics of which
are given in remainder of this section.

@menu
* Software Objects::            Representation of software
* Software Methods::            Manipulation of software
* Global Variables::            Interface to search processes
* Search Functions::            High level functions to perform search
@end menu

@float Figure,fig:overview
@example
                                                      population functions
 global variables                                     --------------------
 ----------------        +------------------+         incorporate
 *population*            |   *population*   |         evict
 *max-population-size*   |------------------|         tournament
 *tournament-size*       |      list of     |         mutate
 *fitness-predicate*     | software objects |         new-individual
 *cross-chance*          +------------------+         evolve
 *fitness-evals*                  |                   mcmc
 *running*                      +-+-+
                                | | |                 software functions
                         +------------------+         --------------
 evolve arguments        | software object  |         genome
 ----------------        |------------------|         phenome
 max-evals               | edits,           |         copy
 max-time                | fitness          |         pick-good
 target                  | ...              |         pick-bad
 period                  +------------------+         mutate
 period-func                       |                  crossover
 filter                            |
               +---------------+---+------------+----------------+
               |               |                |                |
      +---------------+  +-------------+  +-------------+  +------------+
      |      AST      |  |     ELF     |  |    lisp     |  |    asm     |
      |---------------|  |-------------|  |-------------|  |------------|
      |   Abstract    |  | Executable  |  | lisp source |  |  assembly  |
      |  Syntax Tree  |  |  Linkable   |  +-------------+  |    code    |
      +---------------+  |   Format    |                   +------------+
              |          +-------------+                      |
     +--------------+-------------------+            +------------------+
     |              |                   |            |     asm-range    |
  +-------+  +----------------+   +----------+       |------------------|
  | Clang |  |       CIL      |   |   LLVM   |       | memory efficient |
  |-------|  |----------------|   |----------|       +------------------+
  | C AST |  | C Intermediate |   | LLVM IR  |
  +-------+  |    Language    |   +----------+
             +----------------+
@end example
@caption{Software Evolution API.  Exported functions and variables are
shown along with the software object class hierarchy.}
@end float

@node Software Objects, Software Methods, Implementation, Implementation
@section Software Objects
@cindex software objects

The following types of software objects are supported.

@deftp Class asm fitness genome addr-map linker flags
General assembler backend used to manipulate @code{.s} text assembler.
@end deftp

@deftp Class cil fitness genome flags compiler ext raw-size
C abstract syntax trees using C Intermediate Language (CIL) (see
@url{http://kerneis.github.io/cil/}).
@end deftp

@deftp Class clang fitness genome flags compiler ext raw-size
C language (including @code{C}, @code{C++}, @code{C#}, etc...)
abstract syntax trees using the C Language frontend for LLVM (see
@url{http://clang.llvm.org/}).
@end deftp

@deftp Class llvm fitness genome flags compiler ext raw-size ext linker
Low Level Virtual Machine (LLVM) (see @url{http://llvm.org})
intermediate representation (IR).
@end deftp

@deftp Class elf-mips fitness genome base
Executable Linkable Format (ELF) binaries in MIPS architectures.
@end deftp

@deftp Class elf-x86 fitness genome base addresses
Executable Linkable Format (ELF) binaries in x86 architectures.
@end deftp

@deftp Class lisp fitness genome
Common Lisp source code.
@end deftp

@node Software Methods, Global Variables, Software Objects, Implementation
@section Software Methods
@cindex software methods

The following methods are defined for all software object types
exposing a common interface for use by user programs or in heuristic
search.

@anchor{genome}
@defun genome software
The software genotype or ``code'', exposed as a simplified data
structure.  For example an AST genome, e.g., of a @code{cil} or
@code{lisp} software object, my have a tree structure while the genome
of a @code{asm} or @code{elf} software object will be a vector.
@end defun


@anchor{phenome}
@defun phenome software &key bin
The software phenotype.  This method will link, compile or serialize
the software object as necessary returning an executable version of
the software suitable for testing and evaluation
@end defun

@anchor{copy}
@defun copy software
Return a deep copy of a software object.
@end defun

@anchor{pick}
@defun pick software key &optional func
Randomly select elements of the genome of @code{SOFTWARE}.  Selection
may optionally be biased towards particular portions of the genome
based on a @code{key} supplied to @code{pick}.  Related
@code{pick-good} and @code{pick-bad} methods may also be customized.
Useful for e.g., using annotations or fault localization information
to bias mutation operations.
@end defun

@anchor{mutate}
@defun mutate software
Randomly mutate the supplied software object.  The modified software
object and the applied mutation are returned.
@end defun

@anchor{crossover}
@defun crossover software-a software-b
Perform the specified form of crossover on two software objects
returning a new software object and information on the crossover
operation performed (e.g., the indices of crossover).  The related
@code{one-point-crossover} and @code{two-point-crossover} methods may
also be used to perform particular types of crossover.
@end defun

@anchor{from-file}
@defun from-file software file
Initialize a software object @code{SOFTWARE} using the contents of
@code{FILE}.
@end defun

@anchor{to-file}
@defun to-file software file
Write the genome of software object @code{SOFTWARE} to @code{FILE}.
@end defun

@node Global Variables, Search Functions, Software Methods, Implementation
@section Global Variables
@cindex Global Variables

The following global variables are exposed for configuration and
interaction with heuristic search processes.


@anchor{*population*}
@defvar *population*
A list of the software objects currently known to the system.  This
variable may be read to inspect a running search process, or written
to as part of a running search process.
@end defvar

@anchor{*max-population-size*}
@defvar *max-population-size*
Maximum allowable population size.
@end defvar

@anchor{*tournament-size*}
@defvar *tournament-size*
Number of individuals to participate in tournament selection.  Default
value is ``@code{2}''.
@end defvar

@anchor{*tournament-eviction-size*}
@defvar *tournament-eviction-size*
Number of individuals to participate in eviction tournaments.  Default
value is ``@code{2}''.
@end defvar

@anchor{*fitness-predicate* }
@defvar *fitness-predicate* 
Function to compare two fitness values to select which is preferred.
Default value is ``@code{#'>}''.
@end defvar

@anchor{*cross-chance*}
@defvar *cross-chance*
Fraction of new individuals generated using crossover rather than
mutation.  Default value is ``@code{2/3}''.
@end defvar

@anchor{*mut-rate*}
@defvar *mut-rate*
Chance to mutate a new individual. If value is less than 1 then new
individuals will be mutated once with change @code{*MUT-RATE*}.  If
value is equal to 1, then every new individual will be mutated exactly
once.  If value is greater than 1, then new individuals will be
mutated from 1 to *MUT-RATE* times.  Default value is ``@code{1}''.
@end defvar

@anchor{*fitness-evals*}
@defvar *fitness-evals*
This variable tracks the total number of fitness evaluations
performed.
@end defvar

@anchor{*running*}
@defvar *running*
True when a search process is running, set this variable to nil to
stop a running search.
@end defvar

@node Search Functions, Usage, Global Variables, Implementation
@section Search Functions
@cindex search functions

Currently two high-level search functions are implemented.  The
@code{evolve} search function has received much more testing and is
recommended.

@anchor{evolve}
@defun evolve test &key max-evals max-time target period period-fn every-fn filter
Evolve the existing @code{*population*} of software objects using the
supplied @code{TEST} function to evaluate the fitness of software
objects.  The fitness returned by the @code{TEST} function is
optimized.  A steady state evolutionary computation algorithm is used
to evolve increasingly fit software objects in a process resembling
natural selection.
@end defun

@anchor{mcmc}
@defun mcmc original test &key accept-fn max-evals max-time target period period-fn every-fn filter
Preform Markov chain Monte Carlo search from the supplied
@code{ORIGINAL} software object using the supplied @code{TEST}
function to evaluate the fitness of software objects.  The fitness
returned by the @code{test} function is optimized.
@end defun

Both functions take the following optional keyword arguments

@table @code
@item max-evals
stop after this many fitness evaluations

@item max-time
stop after this many seconds

@item target
stop when an individual passes @code{TARGET-FIT}

@item period
interval of fitness evaluations to run @code{PERIOD-FN}

@item period-fn
function to run every @code{PERIOD} fitness evaluations

@item every-fn
function to run before every fitness evaluation

@end table

In addition the @code{evolve} function takes an optional @code{filter}
keyword argument which when specified only includes individual for
which @code{FILTER} returns true, and the @code{mcmc} function takes
an optional @code{accept-fn} keyword argument which is a function of
current and new fitness that returns acceptance.

@node Usage, Mutation, Implementation, Top
@chapter Usage
@cindex usage

@heading Installation

The source code for the Software Evolution library is available at
@url{https://github.com/eschulte/software-evolution}.  The following
Common Lisp packages are required by this library, all of which are
installable through Quicklisp (see @url{http://www.quicklisp.org/}).
@itemize
@item alexandria
@item metabang-bind
@item curry-compose-reader-macros
@item split-sequence
@item cl-ppcre
@item elf
@end itemize

Depending on the type of software object used the following may also
be required.
@itemize
@item
llvm-mutate for @code{llvm} object support (available from
@url{https://github.com/eschulte/llvm-mutate}).
@item
cil-mutate for @code{cil} object support (available from
@url{https://github.com/eschulte/cil-mutate}).
@item
clang-mutate for @code{clang} object support  (available from
@url{https://github.com/eschulte/cil-mutate}).
@end itemize

@heading Packaging

The Software Evolution library is meant to be used from Common Lisp
programs.  Common lisp packages should include the
@code{software-evolution} library and may also include the
@code{software-evolution-utility} library in their package definition
as in the following example.

@example
(defpackage :software-evolution-example
  (:use :common-lisp
        :software-evolution
        :software-evolution-utility))
@end example

@heading Examples

The following examples demonstrate usage.

@menu
* Mutation::                    Mutate a given program
* Evaluation::                  Evaluate fitness of a mutant
@c * Neutral Variants::            Generate neutral variants of a program
@c * Repair::                      Program repair
@c * Memoize Fitness::             A global memoized genome-fitness map
@c * Annotations::                 Annotating portions of the genome
@c * Focused Mutation::            Using annotations to focus mutation operations
@c * Execution Statistics::        Saving statistics
@c * Parallel Fitness Evaluation:: Parallelizing search
@end menu

@node Mutation, Evaluation, Usage, Usage
@section Mutation
@cindex example mutation

The following example code;
@enumerate
@item loads an @code{asm} software object from a file,
@item mutates the object, and then
@item writes the a modified version of the object to disk
@item and prints the applied mutation.
@end enumerate

@verbatiminclude ../examples/001-mutate.lisp

Executing this code will print output resembling the following.

@example
Results of applying (:CUT 44) to gcd written to "/tmp/fileyfH5Hx.s".
@end example

@node Evaluation, Copying, Mutation, Usage
@section Evaluation
@cindex example evaluation

The following example code does the following.
@enumerate
@item
Defines a @code{test} function used to evaluate the fitness of a
software object.  This function makes use of an external shell script
test driver which is run using the @code{shell} function defined in
the @code{software-evolution-utility} library.

@item
The original program is initialized from a file on disk.

@item
Ten mutants of the original are generated by applying random edits.

@item
The @code{fitness} field of each mutant is set using the previously
defined @code{test} method.

@item
The edits and fitness of each mutant are printed.

@end enumerate

@verbatiminclude ../examples/002-evaluation.lisp

Executing this code will print output resembling the following.

@example
 0 fitness for edit (:INSERT 76 38)
 0 fitness for edit (:SWAP 66 77)
 0 fitness for edit (:CUT 50)
10 fitness for edit (:CUT 11)
10 fitness for edit (:SWAP 62 39)
 0 fitness for edit (:INSERT 2 48)
10 fitness for edit (:CUT 66)
 0 fitness for edit (:CUT 73)
10 fitness for edit (:INSERT 73 26)
 0 fitness for edit (:INSERT 71 1)
@end example

@c @node Parallel Fitness Evaluation, Annotations, Usage Examples, Usage Examples
@c @section Parallel Fitness Evaluation
@c @cindex parallel fitness evaluation

@c @node Annotations, Focused Mutation, Parallel Fitness Evaluation, Usage Examples
@c @section Annotations
@c @cindex annotations

@c @node Focused Mutation, Execution Statistics, Annotations, Usage Examples
@c @section Focused Mutation
@c @cindex focused mutation

@c @node Execution Statistics, Memoize Fitness, Focused Mutation, Usage Examples
@c @section Execution Statistics
@c @cindex execution statistics

@c @node Memoize Fitness, Neutral Variants, Execution Statistics, Usage Examples
@c @section Memoize Fitness
@c @cindex memoize fitness

@c @node Neutral Variants, Repair, Memoize Fitness, Usage Examples
@c @section Neutral Variants
@c @cindex neutral variants

@c @node Repair, Function Index, Neutral Variants, Usage Examples
@c @section Repair
@c @cindex repair

@node Copying, GNU Free Documentation License, Usage, Top
@appendix GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
@include gpl.texi

@node GNU Free Documentation License, Index, Copying, Top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include doclicense.texi

@node Index,  , GNU Free Documentation License, Top
@unnumbered Index

@c Combine all index (function variable type and concept) types into a
@c single index.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@printindex cp

@bye
